*We Don’t Stand for Bullies': Diverse Voices in Area Back Action Against IraqMary Jordan Washington Post Staff WriterThe Washington Post (1974-Current file); Aug 10, 1990;ProQuest Historical Newspapers: The Washington PostVetoran Stuart Hoik, 06, aaya of Saddam Hussein, “Wo have got to atop tfais madman."Diverse Voices in Area Back Action Against IraqBy Mary JordanWaihifiRton Pool Stiff Writer   It’s not rising gasoline prices or even the threat of a recession, it’s that Iraq’s Saddam Hussein has got to be stopped.   “You're darn right we lad to do it,” said Stuart Belk, 65, a retired brick-, layer from Alexandria, responding to the deployment of U.S. warplanes and troops to the Middle Cast.   “The worst word in the world is ‘dictator,’ and that’s what Saddam Hussein is. What do you think the United States is for, if not to help countries in trouble? We have got to stop this madman," Belk said.   Forty-five years and countless reflections since a land mine took his leg and almost his life in Hitler’s Germany, Belk said there are still certain things worth risking lives for.   “Oil is not one of them,” he said, pounding his fist on his wheelchair outside the Veterans Administration’s nursing home in Northwest Washington. "The reason we should be over there is because we don’t stand for dictators. We don’t stand for bullies who gobble up other countries."   City and suburban residents, young and old, wealthy and poor who were interviewed supported the U.S. actions. Of the 40 or so interviewed, from a vice president of Smithy Braedon Co., a real estate brokerage firm, to a DistrictBlocked due to copyright See full page image or microfilm.	“MICHAELS. DELINE“all the guys... are backing Bush”maintenance worker, from people pumping gas in Fairfax City to those sitting at lunch counters in the District's Shepherd Park, there was a rare unanimity of opinion.   They said they were willing to conserve oh gas, even pay a higher price at the pump,' so long as oil companies weren't pocketing extra profits.   No one wants thousands of American men and women in a war zone, they said, yet they would understand if more were needed. Deep in their gut, they said, they knew the U.S. commitment in the Persian Gulf will be long and expensive.   “I wish we had done something in the past” to thwart Saddam Hussein and his million-strong army, said Sarah Cox, a Fairfax County management analyst who lives in McLean.   As she pumped $24.73 worth of Chevron gas into her blue Caprice Classic, Cox said “economic reasons alone” should not justify the U.S. armed forces "charging off like a light brigade.”   While she regretted that the United States “sat on its hands until the only solution was a military one," Cox said she understood the need now to stop Hussein.	,   The sudden invasion of Kuwait eight days ago reminded many how quickly the landscape can change: Saddam Hus- Sco VOICES, A26, Col. 6“Ws have a responsibility to do whatever it takes to get Iraq out of Kuwait.”— Michael S. DeLlneReproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.OT CTRINA QUN0-T1IC WASHIKOTON POSTGerald Dunn, a federal government employee, says higher costs at the pump are a small price to pay to defend a “country under attack*"Area Residents Willing: To Conserve Gasoline ~VOICES, From A25sein, unknown or confused with Jordan's King Hussein days ago, is now denounced by little children, one mother said; Saudi Arabia was an oil-rich OPEC country to be wary of, not an ally to defend; Iran was more evil than Iraq, not the other way around; and world news was upbeat, as communism continued to collapse.	,   Now, George Washington University business student Michael S. DeLine said, Americans feel the pressure of being a superpower. “We have a responsibility to do whatever it takes to get Iraq out of Kuwait.”   Even if it means a draft? he is asked.   “I don't think it will come to that,” but if called, DeLine, 21, said those his age would see it as their duty.   "We can’t let some little country wreck the world economy," DeLine said. "All the guysI talked to in the [Sigma Phi Epsilon] fraternity are totally for it; they’re backing Bush. It’s not just that Hussein took over another country. He took over resources of world importance."   “If this continues, it’s going to have a dramatic impact on the way we use our automobiles,” said Douglas Fischer, a physical therapist in Silver Spring, who paid 15 cents more a gallon for gasoline on Wednesday than he did last week.   “I wouldn’t want to be one of the guys readying for combat,” Fischer, 26, said. "And I wouldn’t want us over there just because of gas prices. War is never a good idea, but we have got to show support for Saudi Arabia.”   While area residents interviewed support the U.S. role as democratic peace-keeper, many said they worry about the costs of that venture. The idea of combat in the deserts of the Middle East is of particular concern, especially to those who fought in previous wars.   "Saudi Arabia and other countries over the'e must make it vary clear—and not in some back room—that they want us over there and that they are going to help us,” said Clyde Wray, 44, who served as a private in the Army’s 199 Light Infantry Brigade in Vietnam.   “We cannot do this alone, again. Hussein's men know the area; he’s got [poisonous nerve] gas,” Wray said.   “He could blow one of our ships up in the Gulf in a second," said 74-year-old District resident Willie J. Waller. “There are narrow straits, mountains and deserts. It's a dangerous place.”   Wray said he’s had a feeling tliat the next war would erupt in the Middle East because "thereis a lot of hate and oil over,, there.”	. „„„   “Yes, Bush did the right thing,” the Vietnam veteran;'; said. "But what I’m worried ’ about now is the next step^I__ hope it’s not a misstep. We can-~ not make the mistake again of" taking half-steps, half-"' measures.”	.   "It’s not a small thing to keep" up the image of the U.S. as sAiv-"' ior,” said Richard Rogers, a mak" chine operator in the District/" "Isn’t that how we see oi)f.-.f selves? As peace-keeper? If yflS’ t didn't do that, what would be? Just another country.” ..   Rogers, 42, said that the U.§/'.’ image as guardian of democracy .., also works as a deterrent to ter;;, rorists.   If the United States and all its; might wasn't viewed as looking- out for smaller countries’ inter- ; ests, Rogers said, "things could get completely out of hand.;- Anybody could do anything/; Terrorism would spread like a cancer.”	,   Poor people may be the first'-'* to feel repercussions from Iraq's invasion of Kuwait. Al->." ready, the price of a tankful of gasoline has increased a dollar— or two at many pumps in the region.   "This is going to hurt the. poor man and the U.S. car tor.... dustry,” Rogers predicted.   “Even if they ration gas, ;lt won’t matter to rich people*”...;, said Belk, from the VA nursing-,:.’ home. “They will buy it on the black market. But if you don't,7 have much money to begin with;-’; it’s going to make a difference/*—.   Gerald Dunn, a federal gov*” - eminent employee from Alex-* 1 andria, said that he believed'"" that most middle- and upper-in-"“ come families wouldn’t even no-.; — tice the increase in gas prices.-'; Besides, he said, it was a small -price for them to pay while the nation defended a "country un-' der attack.”	’’   Saddam Hussein, alternatively described as a madman, bully-”" and dictator, drew passionate'"''. repudiation.   "No way can we let him get' away with this,” said Robert Stout, a vice president at Smithy Braedon, referring to . the Iraqi president’s decision to.... annex Kuwait.	,   “Saddam Hussein really,,,,.* scares me," said Falls Church,,,, music instructor Joseph Moq-, ton. "I fear we have a madmaq,,,„; out there and he is not going to;;,* stop at Kuwait. These days, it takes is a nuclear weapon; small enough to fit in a suit-.;.; case.”	—   ”1 just hope they stop him — quick,” said Viola Anderson, a"-"retired hotel employee in tlie	District. "I really feel things could turn terrible, if we donfr stop him soon.”	>•'«■«Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.